---
layout: distill
title: MIPT reading
description: papers 
tags: distill formatting
giscus_comments: true
date: 2023-12-25
featured: true

authors:
  - name: Siddhant
    url: "siddhant-midha.github.io"
    affiliations:
      name: IITB

bibliography:  

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  # - name: 
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---
Merry Christmas! Here I compile papers on MIPT that I have been reading.

## Random quantum circuits

1. [Quantum Zeno Effect and the Many-body Entanglement Transition](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1808.06134.pdf): This paper is one of those starting the discussion on MIPT explicitly: they provide numerics for entanglement entropy dynamics in large-scale Clifford and small Haar-random models sprinkled with measurements. Notably, they perform a scaling analysis of the steady-state EE as well as the dynamics.
2. [Measurement-driven entanglement transition in hybrid quantum circuits](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.08092.pdf): This paper continues the discussion initiated previously with extensive numerics on multiple models. What I like most here is the distribution of the stabilizer lengths as the measurement strength is varied -- the entanglement phase transition is _clearly_ elucidated because of continuous vanishing of the peak in the distribution at 'large' lengths. Moreover, the logarithmic correction in the volume law is clearly outlined, and can be explained by this length distribution! Lastly, they carry over the RQC analysis to systematic models -- which lack randomness in (i) measurement locations and/or (ii) unitaries, attempting to make the point that such hybrid circuits will generically show a volume-law to area-law transition. Also, initial state independence. Wink, wink.

## Fermionic Systems

1. [Entanglement in a free fermion chain under continuous monitoring](https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04638): This paper studies the entanglement dynamics in a free fermion chain under continuous measurement of all occupation numbers with a quasiparticle pair approach. They point out that the volume law is unstable to _any_ $p > 0$ measurement strength, because of finite coherent lifetime under measurement.
2. [Growth of entanglement entropy under local projective measurements](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2109.10837.pdf): If $1/\tau$ is the measurement rate, then these guys show that for a fermionic chain with PBC and monitoring of local number operator, then the critical time $\tau_c$ for the switchover from area to volume law diverges with the length, hence the thermodynamic limit would only exhibit an area-law of the saturated EE!

